Bartholomew Jo-Jo "Bart" Simpson is one of the main characters in the American animated television series The Simpsons who is part of the titular family. Widely regarded as one of the greatest fictional characters of all time, he was named by Time as one of the most important people of the 20th century.

Bart made his television debut in the short "Good Night" on The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19, 1987. Cartoonist Matt Groening created and designed Bart while waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks's office. Initially called to pitch a series of shorts based on his comic strip Life in Hell, Groening developed a new set of characters. Unlike the other Simpson family members, who were named after Groening's relatives, Bart's name is an anagram of brat. After two years on The Tracey Ullman Show, the Simpson family received their own series, which premiered on Fox on December 17, 1989. Bart has appeared in every episode of The Simpsons except "Four Great Women and a Manicure".

Always ten years old, Bart is the eldest child and only son of Homer and Marge Simpson and the brother of Lisa and Maggie. Known for his penchant for mischief, rebelliousness and disrespect for authority, Bart's most iconic traits include his chalkboard gags in the opening sequence, prank calls to Moe's Tavern, and catchphrases like "Eat my shorts", "¡Ay, caramba!", "Don't have a cow, man!", and "I'm Bart Simpson, who the hell are you?". Bart has also appeared in The Simpsons'-related media, including video games, the 2007 film version of the series, The Simpsons Ride, commercials, comic books, and an extensive line of merchandise. Nancy Cartwright, Bart's voice actor, intended to audition for the role of Lisa, and Yeardley Smith auditioned for Bart. Smith's voice was deemed too high-pitched for a boy, while Cartwright found Lisa less appealing as a character and opted to try out for Bart—a role she felt better suited her.

Bart's protagonist status during the show's first two seasons led to "Bartmania", which spawned Bart-themed merchandise touting his rebellious persona and pride in underachieving. The traits were criticized by parents and educators, who viewed him as a negative influence on children. By the third season, Homer became the show's figurehead character and the series shifted its focus to the family as a whole, although Bart remains a breakout character. He is considered one of the most iconic fictional television characters of the 1990s. Entertainment Weekly named him Entertainer of the Year in 1990. Cartwright has received accolades for her portrayal of Bart, including a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 and an Annie Award in 1995. In 2000, Bart and the rest of the Simpson family were honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Role in The Simpsons

The Simpsons employs a floating timeline, in which characters either do not age or age minimally; the show is always presumed to take place in the present year.[1][2] Always ten years old,[3] Bartholomew,[4] best known by his short-form name Bart, is the eldest child and only son of Homer and Marge Simpson;[5][6] he has two younger sisters, Lisa and Maggie.[7] In several episodes of The Simpsons, events have been tied to specific times, though these timelines are sometimes contradicted in later episodes. In "I Married Marge" (season three, 1991), Bart's birth is placed in the early 1980s.[8] In "Simpsorama" (season 26, 2014), Bart states his birthday as February 23,[9] while The Bart Book by series creator Matt Groening lists it as April 1.[4] In "Bart's Birthday" (season 36, 2024), Bart, in a hypothetical series finale, celebrates his eleventh birthday, much to his dismay, as he has always identified as being ten years old.[10]

Bart lived with his parents in Springfield's Lower East Side before the family purchased their first home.[11] When Lisa was born, Bart initially felt jealous of the attention she received but soon warmed to her when her first word turned out to be "Bart".[11] Bart's first day of school occurred in the early 1990s. Initially excited, his enthusiasm was quickly crushed by an indifferent teacher, prompting Marge to worry about him. During recess, Bart befriended Milhouse and began entertaining classmates with gestures and rude jokes. Principal Skinner warned Bart, "You've just started school, and the path you choose now may be the one you follow for the rest of your life! Now, what do you say?" Bart replied, "Eat my shorts".[12] However, the episode "That 90's Show" (season 19, 2008) contradicted much of this timeline, revealing that Homer and Marge were childless during the early 1990s.[13]

Bart's hobbies include skateboarding,[14] watching television—particularly The Krusty the Clown Show and its segment The Itchy & Scratchy Show[15]—reading comic books, especially Radioactive Man,[15] playing video games,[16] and causing general mischief.[17] His favorite movies are Jaws and the Star Wars trilogy, while his favorite board games include Hippo in the House, The Game of Lent, and Citizenship.[18] Throughout the series, Bart has been a student at Springfield Elementary School, where he is part of Edna Krabappel's fourth-grade class.[19][20] Although too young for full-time work, Bart has taken on several part-time jobs over the years. He works as a bartender at Fat Tony's social club in "Bart the Murderer" (season three, 1991);[21] as Krusty the Clown's assistant in "Bart Gets Famous" (season five, 1994);[22] as a doorman in Springfield's burlesque house, the Maison Derrière, in "Bart After Dark" (season eight, 1996);[23] and briefly owns his own factory in "Homer's Enemy" (season eight, 1997).[24] 